THE FALL OF ROBESPIERRE

ACT I.

SCENE--'The Tuilleries'.

BARRERE.
  The tempest gathers--be it mine to seek
  A friendly shelter, ere it bursts upon him.
  But where? and how? I fear the tyrant's soul--
  Sudden in action, fertile in resource,
  And rising awful 'mid impending ruins;
  In splendour gloomy, as the midnight meteor,
  That fearless thwarts the elemental war.

  When last in secret conference we met,
  He scowl'd upon me with suspicious rage,
  Making his eye the inmate of my bosom.
  I know he scorns me--and I feel, I hate him--
  Yet there is in him that which makes me tremble!

[Exit.]

[Enter TALLIEN and LEGENDRE.]

TALLIEN.
  It was Barrere, Legendre! didst thou mark him?
  Abrupt he turn'd, yet linger'd as he went,
  And tow'rds us cast a look of doubtful meaning.

LEGENDRE.
  I mark'd him well. I met his eye's last glance;
  It menac'd not so proudly as of yore.
  Methought he would have spoke--but that he dar'd not--
  Such agitation darken'd on his brow.

TALLIEN.
  'Twas all-distrusting guilt that kept from bursting
  Th'imprison'd secret struggling in the face:
  E'en as the sudden breeze upstarting onwards
  Hurries the thunder cloud, that pois'd awhile
  Hung in mid air, red with its mutinous burthen.

LEGENDRE.
  Perfidious traitor!--still afraid to bask
  In the full blaze of power, the rustling serpent
  Lurks in the thicket of the tyrant's greatness,
  Ever prepar'd to sting who shelters him.
  Each thought, each action in himself converges;
  And love and friendship on his coward heart
  Shine like the powerless sun on polar ice:
  To all attach'd, by turns deserting all,
  Cunning and dark--a necessary villain!

TALLIEN.
  Yet much depends upon him--well you know
  With plausible harangue 'tis his to paint
  Defeat like victory--and blind the mob
  With truth-mix'd falsehood. They, led on by him,
  And wild of head to work their own destruction,
  Support with uproar what he plans in darkness.

LEGENDRE.
  O what a precious name is liberty
  To scare or cheat the simple into slaves!
  Yes--we must gain him over: by dark hints
  We'll show enough to rouse his watchful fears,
  Till the cold coward blaze a patriot.
  O Danton! murder'd friend! assist my counsels--
  Hover around me on sad memory's wings,
  And pour thy daring vengeance in my heart.
  Tallien! if but to-morrow's fateful sun
  Beholds the tyrant living--we are dead!

TALLIEN.
  Yet his keen eye that flashes mighty meanings--

LEGENDRE.
  Fear not--or rather fear th'alternative,
  And seek for courage e'en in cowardice--
  But see--hither he comes--let us away!
  His brother with him, and the bloody Couthon,
  And, high of haughty spirit, young St. Just.

[Exeunt.]

[Enter ROBESPIERRE, COUTHON, ST. JUST, and ROBESPIERRE Junior.]

ROBESPIERRE.
  What! did La Fayette fall before my power--
  And did I conquer Roland's spotless virtues--
  The fervent eloquence of Vergniaud's tongue,
  And Brissot's thoughtful soul unbribed and bold!
  Did zealot armies haste in vain to save them!
  What! did th' assassin's dagger aim its point
  Vain, as a dream of murder, at my bosom;
  And shall I dread the soft luxurious Tallien?
  Th' Adonis Tallien,--banquet-hunting Tallien,--
  Him, whose heart flutters at the dice-box!
  Him, Who ever on the harlots' downy pillow
  Resigns his head impure to feverish slumbers!

ST. JUST.
  I cannot fear him--yet we must not scorn him.
  Was it not Antony that conquer'd Brutus,
  Th' Adonis, banquet-hunting Antony?
  The state is not yet purified: and though
  The stream runs clear, yet at the bottom lies
  The thick black sediment of all the factions--
  It needs no magic hand to stir it up!

COUTHON.
  O, we did wrong to spare them--fatal error!
  Why lived Legendre, when that Danton died,
  And Collot d'Herbois dangerous in crimes?
  I've fear'd him, since his iron heart endured
  To make of Lyons one vast human shambles,
  Compar'd with which the sun-scorch'd wilderness
  Of Zara were a smiling paradise.

ST. JUST.
  Rightly thou judgest, Couthon! He is one,
  Who flies from silent solitary anguish,
  Seeking forgetful peace amid the jar
  Of elements. The howl of maniac uproar
  Lulls to sad sleep the memory of himself.
  A calm is fatal to him--then he feels
  The dire upboilings of the storm within him.
  A tiger mad with inward wounds!--I dread
  The fierce and restless turbulence of guilt.

ROBESPIERRE.
  Is not the Commune ours? the stern Tribunal?
  Dumas? and Vivier? Fleuriot? and Louvet?
  And Henriot? We'll denounce a hundred, nor
  Shall they behold to-morrow's sun roll westward.

ROBESPIERRE JUNIOR.
  Nay--I am sick of blood! my aching heart
  Reviews the long, long train of hideous horrors
  That still have gloom'd the rise of the Republic.
  I should have died before Toulon, when war Became the patriot!

ROBESPIERRE.
               Most unworthy wish!
  He, whose heart sickens at the blood of traitors
  Would be himself a traitor, were he not
  A coward! 'Tis congenial souls alone
  Shed tears of sorrow for each other's fate.
  O, thou art brave, my brother! and thine eye
  Full firmly shines amid the groaning battle--
  Yet in thine heart the woman-form of pity
  Asserts too large a share, an ill-timed guest!
  There is unsoundness in the state--to-morrow
  Shall see it cleansed by wholesome massacre!

ROBESPIERRE JUNIOR.
  Beware! already do the Sections murmur--
  "O the great glorious patriot, Robespierre--
  The tyrant guardian of the country's freedom!"

COUTHON.
  'Twere folly sure to work great deeds by halves!
  Much I suspect the darksome fickle heart Of cold Barrere!

ROBESPIERRE.
  I see the villain in him!

ROBESPIERRE JUNIOR.
  If he--if all forsake thee--what remains?

ROBESPIERRE.
  Myself! the steel-strong rectitude of soul
  And poverty sublime 'mid circling virtues!
  The giant victories, my counsels form'd,
  Shall stalk around me with sun-glittering plumes,
  Bidding the darts of calumny fall pointless.

[Exeunt. Manet Couthon.]

COUTHON.
  So we deceive ourselves! What goodly virtues
  Bloom on the poisonous branches of ambition!
  Still, Robespierre! thou'l't guard thy country's freedom
  To despotize in all the patriot's pomp.
  While conscience, 'mid the mob's applauding clamours,
  Sleeps in thine ear, nor whispers--blood-stain'd tyrant!
  Yet what is conscience? superstition's dream
  Making such deep impression on our sleep--
  That long th' awaken'd breast retains its horrors!
  But he returns--and with him comes Barrere.

[Exit Couthon.]

[Enter ROBESPIERRE and BARRERE.]

ROBESPIERRE.
  There is no danger but in cowardice.--
  Barrere! we make the danger, when we fear it.
  We have such force without, as will suspend
  The cold and trembling treachery of these members.

BARRERE.
  Twill be a pause of terror.--

ROBESPIERRE.
                                  But to whom?
  Rather the short-lived slumber of the tempest,
  Gathering its strength anew. The dastard traitors!
  Moles, that would undermine the rooted oak!
  A pause!--a moment's pause!--'Tis all their life.

BARRERE.
  Yet much they talk--and plausible their speech.
  Couthon's decree has given such powers, that--

ROBESPIERRE.
  That what?

BARRERE.
             The freedom of debate--

ROBESPIERRE.
                                     Transparent mask!
  They wish to clog the wheels of government,
  Forcing the hand that guides the vast machine
  To bribe them to their duty.--English patriots!
  Are not the congregated clouds of war
  Black all around us? In our very vitals
  Works not the king-bred poison of rebellion?
  Say, what shall counteract the selfish plottings
  Of wretches, cold of heart, nor awed by fears
  Of him, whose power directs th' eternal justice?
  Terror? or secret-sapping gold? The first.
  Heavy, but transient as the ills that cause it;
  And to the virtuous patriot render'd light
  By the necessities that gave it birth:
  The other fouls the fount of the Republic,
  Making it flow polluted to all ages;
  Inoculates the state with a slow venom,
  That once imbibed, must be continued ever.
  Myself incorruptible I ne'er could bribe them--
  Therefore they hate me.

BARRERE.
                           Are the Sections friendly?

ROBESPIERRE.
  There are who wish my ruin--but I'll make them
  Blush for the crime in blood!

BARRERE.
                               Nay--but I tell thee,
  Thou art too fond of slaughter--and the right
  (If right it be) workest by most foul means!

ROBESPIERRE.
  Self-centering Fear! how well thou canst ape Mercy!
  Too fond of slaughter!--matchless hypocrite!
  Thought Barrere so, when Brissot, Danton died?
  Thought Barrere so, when through the streaming streets
  Of Paris red-eyed Massacre, o'er wearied,
  Reel'd heavily, intoxicate with blood?
  And when (O heavens!) in Lyons' death-red square
  Sick fancy groan'd o'er putrid hills of slain,
  Didst thou not fiercely laugh, and bless the day?
  Why, thou hast been the mouth-piece of all horrors,
  And, like a blood-hound, crouch'd for murder! Now
  Aloof thou standest from the tottering pillar,
  Or, like a frighted child behind its mother,
  Hidest thy pale face in the skirts of--Mercy!

BARRERE.
  O prodigality of eloquent anger!
  Why now I see thou'rt weak--thy case is desperate!
  The cool ferocious Robespierre turn'd scolder!

ROBESPIERRE.
  Who from a bad man's bosom wards the blow,
  Reserves the whetted dagger for his own.
  Denounced twice--and twice I sav'd his life!

[Exit.]

BARRERE.
  The Sections will support them--there's the point!
  No! he can never weather out the storm--
  Yet he is sudden in revenge--No more!
  I must away to Tallien.

[Exit.]

[SCENE changes to the House of Adelaide. ADELAIDE enters, speaking to a
Servant.]

ADELAIDE.
  Didst thou present the letter that I gave thee?
  Did Tallien answer, he would soon return?

SERVANT.
  He is in the Tuilleries--with him, Legendre--
  In deep discourse they seem'd: as I approach'd
  He waved his hand, as bidding me retire:
  I did not interrupt him.

[Returns the letter.]

ADELAIDE.
                            Thou didst rightly.

[Exit Servant.]

  O this new freedom! at how dear a price
  We've bought the seeming good! The peaceful virtues
  And every blandishment of private life,
  The father's cares, the mother's fond endearment,
  All sacrificed to liberty's wild riot.
  The winged hours, that scatter'd roses round me,
  Languid and sad drag their slow course along,
  And shake big gall-drops from their heavy wings.
  But I will steal away these anxious thoughts
  By the soft languishment of warbled airs,
  If haply melodies may lull the sense
  Of sorrow for a while.

[Soft Music.]

[Enter TALLIEN.]

TALLIEN.
  Music, my love? O breathe again that air!
  Soft nurse of pain, it soothes the weary soul
  Of care, sweet as the whisper'd breeze of evening
  That plays around the sick man's throbbing temples.

SONG.
    Tell me, on what holy ground
    May domestic peace be found?
    Halcyon daughter of the skies,
    Far on fearful wing she flies,
    From the pomp of sceptred state,
    From the rebel's noisy hate.

    In a cottag'd vale she dwells,
    List'ning to the Sabbath bells!
    Still around her steps are seen
    Spotless honour's meeker mien,
    Love, the sire of pleasing fears,
    Sorrow smiling through her tears,
    And conscious of the past employ,
    Memory, bosom-spring of joy.


TALLIEN.
  I thank thee, Adelaide! 'twas sweet, though mournful.
  But why thy brow o'ercast, thy cheek so wan?
  Thou look'st as a lorn maid beside some stream,
  That sighs away the soul in fond despairing,
  While sorrow sad, like the dank willow near her,
  Hangs o'er the troubled fountain of her eye.

ADELAIDE.
  Ah! rather let me ask what mystery lowers
  On Tallien's darken'd brow. Thou dost me wrong--
  Thy soul distemper'd, can my heart be tranquil?

TALLIEN.
  Tell me, by whom thy brother's blood was spilt?
  Asks he not vengeance on these patriot murderers?
  It has been borne too tamely. Fears and curses
  Groan on our midnight beds, and e'en our dreams
  Threaten the assassin hand of Robespierre.
  He dies!--nor has the plot escaped his fears.

ADELAIDE.
  Yet--yet--be cautious! much I fear the Commune--
  The tyrant's creatures, and their fate with his
  Fast link'd in close indissoluble union.
  The pale Convention--

TALLIEN.
                        Hate him as they fear him,
  Impatient of the chain, resolved and ready.

ADELAIDE.
  Th' enthusiast mob, confusion's lawless sons--

TALLIEN.
  They are aweary of his stern morality,
  The fair-mask'd offspring of ferocious pride.
  The Sections too support the delegates:
  All--all is ours! e'en now the vital air
  Of Liberty, condens'd awhile, is bursting
  (Force irresistible!) from its compressure--
  To shatter the arch chemist in the explosion!

[Enter BILLAUD VARENNES and BOURDON L'OISE.]

[Adelaide retires.]

BOURDON L'OISE.
  Tallien! was this a time for amorous conference?
  Henriot, the tyrant's most devoted creature,
  Marshals the force of Paris: The fierce club,
  With Vivier at their head, in loud acclaim
  Have sworn to make the guillotine in blood
  Float on the scaffold.--But who comes here?

[Enter BARRERE abruptly.]

BARRERE.
  Say, are ye friends to freedom? I am hers!
  Let us, forgetful of all common feuds,
  Rally around her shrine! E'en now the tyrant
  Concerts a plan of instant massacre!

BILLAUD VARENNES.
  Away to the Convention! with that voice
  So oft the herald of glad victory,
  Rouse their fallen spirits, thunder in their ears
  The names of tyrant, plunderer, assassin!
  The violent workings of my soul within
  Anticipate the monster's blood!

  [Cry from the street of
    --No tyrant! Down with the tyrant!]

TALLIEN.
  Hear ye that outcry?--If the trembling members
  Even for a moment hold his fate suspended,
  I swear by the holy poniard, that stabbed Caesar,
  This dagger probes his heart!

[Exeunt omnes.]



ACT II.

SCENE--The Convention.

[ROBESPIERRE mounts the Tribune.]

ROBESPIERRE.
  Once more befits it that the voice of truth,
  Fearless in innocence, though leaguer'd round
  By envy and her hateful brood of hell,
  Be heard amid this hall; once more befits
  The patriot, whose prophetic eye so oft
  Has pierc'd thro' faction's veil, to flash on crimes
  Of deadliest import. Mouldering in the grave
  Sleeps Capet's caitiff corse; my daring hand
  Levell'd to earth his blood-cemented throne,
  My voice declared his guilt, and stirr'd up France
  To call for vengeance. I too dug the grave
  Where sleep the Girondists, detested band!
  Long with the show of freedom they abused
  Her ardent sons. Long time the well-turn'd phrase,
  The high fraught sentence, and the lofty tone
  Of declamation thunder'd in this hall,
  Till reason, midst a labyrinth of words,
  Perplex'd, in silence seem'd to yield assent.
  I durst oppose. Soul of my honour'd friend,
  Spirit of Marat, upon thee I call--
  Thou know'st me faithful, know'st with what warm zeal
  I urged the cause of justice, stripp'd the mask
  From faction's deadly visage, and destroy'd
  Her traitor brood. Whose patriot arm hurl'd down
  Hebert and Rousin, and the villain friends
  Of Danton, foul apostate! those, who long
  Mask'd treason's form in liberty's fair garb,
  Long deluged France with blood, and durst defy
  Omnipotence! but I, it seems, am false!
  I am a traitor too! I--Robespierre!
  I--at whose name the dastard despot brood
  Look pale with fear, and call on saints to help them
  Who dares accuse me? who shall dare belie
  My spotless name? Speak, ye accomplice band,
  Of what am I accused? of what strange crime
  Is Maximilian Robespierre accused,
  That through this hall the buzz of discontent
  Should murmur? who shall speak?

BILLAUD VARENNES.
                                 O patriot tongue,
  Belying the foul heart! Who was it urged
  Friendly to tyrants that accurst decree,
  Whose influence brooding o'er this hallow'd hall,
  Has chill'd each tongue to silence. Who destroy'd
  The freedom of debate, and carried through
  The fatal law, that doom'd the delegates,
  Unheard before their equals, to the bar
  Where cruelty sat throned, and murder reign'd
  With her Dumas coequal? Say--thou man
  Of mighty eloquence, whose law was that?

COUTHON.
  That law was mine. I urged it--I proposed--
  The voice of France assembled in her sons
  Assented, though the tame and timid voice
  Of traitors murmur'd. I advised that law--
  I justify it. It was wise and good.

BARRERE.
  Oh, wondrous wise, and most convenient too!
  I have long mark'd thee, Robespierre--and now
  Proclaim thee traitor--tyrant!

[Loud applauses.]

ROBESPIERRE.
  It is well;--I am a traitor! oh, that I had fallen
  When Regnault lifted high the murderous knife;
  Regnault, the instrument, belike of those
  Who now themselves would fain assassinate,
  And legalize their murders. I stand here
  An isolated patriot--hemm'd around
  By faction's noisy pack; beset and bay'd
  By the foul hell-hounds who know no escape
  From justice' outstretch'd arm, but by the force
  That pierces through her breast.

[Murmurs, and shouts of
    --Down with the tyrant!]

ROBESPIERRE.
  Nay, but I will be heard. There was a time
  When Robespierre began, the loud applauses
  Of honest patriots drown'd the honest sound.
  But times are changed, and villany prevails.

COLLOT D'HERBOIS.
  No--villany shall fall. France could not brook
  A monarch's sway;--sounds the dictator's name
  More soothing to her ear?

BOURDON L'OISE.
                            Rattle her chains
  More musically now than when the hand
  Of Brissot forged her fetters; or the crew
  Of Hebert thunder'd out their blasphemies,
  And Danton talk'd of virtue?

ROBESPIERRE.
                              Oh, that Brissot
  Were here again to thunder in this hall,--
  That Hebert lived, and Danton's giant form
  Scowl'd once again defiance! so my soul
  Might cope with worthy foes.
                               People of France,
  Hear me! Beneath the vengeance of the law
  Traitors have perish'd countless; more survive:
  The hydra-headed faction lifts anew
  Her daring front, and fruitful from her wounds,
  Cautious from past defects, contrives new wiles
  Against the sons of Freedom.

TALLIEN.
                               Freedom lives!
  Oppression falls--for France has felt her chains,
  Has burst them too. Who, traitor-like, stept forth
  Amid the hall of Jacobins to save
  Camille Desmoulins, and the venal wretch
  D'Eglantine?

ROBESPIERRE.
               I did--for I thought them honest.
  And Heaven forefend that vengeance e'er should strike,
  Ere justice doom'd the blow.

BARRERE.
                               Traitor, thou didst.
  Yes, the accomplice of their dark designs,
  Awhile didst thou defend them, when the storm
  Lour'd at safe distance. When the clouds frown'd darker,
  Fear'd for yourself, and left them to their fate.
  Oh, I have mark'd thee long, and through the veil
  Seen thy foul projects. Yes, ambitious man,
  Self-will'd dictator o'er the realm of France,
  The vengeance thou hast plann'd for patriots,
  Falls on thy head. Look how thy brother's deeds
  Dishonour thine! He, the firm patriot;
  Thou, the foul parricide of Liberty!

ROBESPIERRE JUNIOR.
  Barrere--attempt not meanly to divide
  Me from my brother. I partake his guilt,
  For I partake his virtue.

ROBESPIERRE.
                            Brother, by my soul,
  More dear I hold thee to my heart, that thus
  With me thou dar'st to tread the dangerous path
  Of virtue, than that nature twined her cords
  Of kindred round us.

BARRERE.
                       Yes, allied in guilt,
  Even as in blood ye are. Oh, thou worst wretch,
  Thou worse than Sylla! hast thou not proscrib'd,
  Yea, in most foul anticipation slaughter'd
  Each patriot representative of France?

BOURDON L'OISE.
  Was not the younger Caesar too to reign
  O'er all our valiant armies in the south,
  And still continue there his merchant wiles?

ROBESPIERRE JUNIOR.
  His merchant wiles! Oh, grant me patience, heaven!
  Was it by merchant wiles I gain'd you back
  Toulon, when proudly on her captive towers
  Wav'd high the English flag? or fought I then
  With merchant wiles, when sword in hand I led
  Your troops to conquest? fought I merchant-like,
  Or barter'd I for victory, when death
  Strode o'er the reeking streets with giant stride,
  And shook his ebon plumes, and sternly smil'd
  Amid the bloody banquet? when appall'd
  The hireling sons of England spread the sail
  Of safety, fought I like a merchant then?
  Oh, patience! patience!

BOURDON L'OISE.
                          How this younger tyrant
  Mouths out defiance to us! even so
  He had led on the armies of the south,
  Till once again the plains of France were drench'd
  With her best blood.

COLLOT D'HERBOIS.
                       Till once again display'd
  Lyons' sad tragedy had call'd me forth
  The minister of wrath, whilst slaughter by
  Had bathed in human blood.

DUBOIS CRANCE.
                             No wonder, friend,
  That we are traitors--that our heads must fall
  Beneath the axe of death! when Caesar-like
  Reigns Robespierre, 'tis wisely done to doom
  The fall of Brutus. Tell me, bloody man,
  Hast thou not parcell'd out deluded France
  As it had been some province won in fight
  Between your curst triumvirate. You, Couthon,
  Go with my brother to the southern plains;
  St. Just, be yours the army of the north;
  Meantime I rule at Paris.

ROBESPIERRE.
                             Matchless knave!
  What--not one blush of conscience on thy cheek--
  Not one poor blush of truth! most likely tale!
  That I, who ruin'd Brissot's towering hopes,
  I, who discover'd Hebert's impious wiles,
  And sharp'd for Danton's recreant neck the axe,
  Should now be traitor! had I been so minded,
  Think ye I had destroy'd the very men
  Whose plots resembled mine? bring forth your proofs
  Of this deep treason. Tell me in whose breast
  Found ye the fatal scroll? or tell me rather
  Who forged the shameless falsehood?

COLLOT D'HERBOIS.
                                      Ask you proofs?
  Robespierre, what proofs were ask'd when Brissot died?

LEGENDRE.
  What proofs adduced you when the Danton died?
  When at the imminent peril of my life
  I rose, and, fearless of thy frowning brow,
  Proclaim'd him guiltless?

ROBESPIERRE.
                            I remember well
  The fatal day. I do repent me much
  That I kill'd Caesar and spared Antony.
  But I have been too lenient. I have spared
  The stream of blood, and now my own must flow
  To fill the current.

[Loud Applauses.]

  Triumph not too soon, Justice may yet be victor.


[Enter ST. JUST, and mounts the Tribune.]

ST. JUST.
  I come from the committee--charged to speak
  Of matters of high import. I omit
  Their orders. Representatives of France,
  Boldly in his own person speaks St. Just
  What his own heart shall dictate.

TALLIEN.
                                    Hear ye this,
  Insulted delegates of France? St. Just
  From your committee comes--comes charged to speak
  Of matters of high import--yet omits
  Their orders! Representatives of France,
  That bold man I denounce, who disobeys
  The nation's orders.--I denounce St. Just.

[Loud Applauses.]

ST. JUST.
          Hear me!

[Violent Murmurs.]

ROBESPIERRE.
  He shall be heard!

BURDON L'OISE.
  Must we contaminate this sacred hall
  With the foul breath of treason?

COLLOT D'HERBOIS.
                                  Drag him away!
  Hence with him to the bar.

COUTHON.
                            Oh, just proceedings!
  Robespierre prevented liberty of speech--
  And Robespierre is a tyrant! Tallien reigns,
  He dreads to hear the voice of innocence--
  And St. Just must be silent!

LEGENDRE.
                               Heed we well
  That justice guide our actions. No light import
  Attends this day. I move St. Just be heard.

FRERON.
  Inviolate be the sacred right of man,
  The freedom of debate.

  [Violent Applauses.]

ST. JUST.
  I may be heard then! much the times are changed,
  When St. Just thanks this hall for hearing him.
  Robespierre is call'd a tyrant. Men of France,
  Judge not too soon. By popular discontent
  Was Aristides driven into exile,
  Was Phocion murder'd! Ere ye dare pronounce
  Robespierre is guilty, it befits ye well,
  Consider who accuse him. Tallien,
  Bourdon of Oise--the very men denounced,
  For that their dark intrigues disturb'd the plan
  Of government. Legendre, the sworn friend
  Of Danton fall'n apostate. Dubois Crance,
  He who at Lyons spared the royalists--
  Collot d'Herbois--

BOURDON L'OISE.
                     What--shall the traitor rear
  His head amid our tribune, and blaspheme
  Each patriot? shall the hireling slave of faction--

ST. JUST.
  I am of no one faction. I contend
  Against all factions.

TALLIEN.
                        I espouse the cause
  Of truth. Robespierre on yester morn pronounced
  Upon his own authority a report.
  To-day St. Just comes down. St. Just neglects
  What the committee orders, and harangues
  From his own will. O citizens of France,
  I weep for you--I weep for my poor country--
  I tremble for the cause of Liberty,
  When individuals shall assume the sway,
  And with more insolence than kingly pride
  Rule the Republic.

BILLAUD VARENNES.
                     Shudder, ye representatives of France,
  Shudder with horror. Henriot commands
  The marshall'd force of Paris. Henriot,
  Foul parricide--the sworn ally of Hebert
  Denounced by all--upheld by Robespierre.
  Who spared La Valette? who promoted him,
  Stain'd with the deep die of nobility?
  Who to an ex-peer gave the high command?
  Who screen'd from justice the rapacious thief?
  Who cast in chains the friends of Liberty?
  Robespierre, the self-styled patriot, Robespierre--
  Robespierre, allied with villain Daubignè--
  Robespierre, the foul arch tyrant, Robespierre.

BOURDON L'OISE.
  He talks of virtue--of morality--
  Consistent patriot! he Daubignè's friend!
  Henriot's supporter virtuous! preach of virtue,
  Yet league with villains, for with Robespierre
  Villains alone ally. Thou art a tyrant!
  I style thee tyrant, Robespierre!

[Loud Applauses.]

ROBESPIERRE.
  Take back the name. Ye citizens of France--

[Violent Clamour. Cries of
    --Down with the tyrant!]

TALLlEN.
  Oppression falls. The traitor stands appall'd--
  Guilt's iron fangs engrasp his shrinking soul--
  He hears assembled France denounce his crimes!
  He sees the mask torn from his secret sins--
  He trembles on the precipice of fate.
  Fall'n guilty tyrant! murder'd by thy rage,
  How many an innocent victim's blood has stain'd
  Fair freedom's altar! Sylla-like thy hand
  Mark'd down the virtues, that, thy foes removed,
  Perpetual Dictator thou might'st reign,
  And tyrannize o'er France, and call it freedom!
  Long time in timid guilt the traitor plann'd
  His fearful wiles--success embolden'd sin--
  And his stretch'd arm had grasp'd the diadem
  Ere now, but that the coward's heart recoil'd,
  Lest France awaked, should rouse her from her dream,
  And call aloud for vengeance. He, like Caesar,
  With rapid step urged on his bold career,
  Even to the summit of ambitious power,
  And deem'd the name of King alone was wanting.
  Was it for this we hurl'd proud Capet down?
  Is it for this we wage eternal war
  Against the tyrant horde of murderers,
  The crowned cockatrices whose foul venom
  Infects all Europe? was it then for this
  We swore to guard our liberty with life,
  That Robespierre should reign? the spirit of freedom
  Is not yet sunk so low. The glowing flame
  That animates each honest Frenchman's heart
  Not yet extinguish'd. I invoke thy shade,
  Immortal Brutus! I too wear a dagger;
  And if the representatives of France
  Through fear or favour should delay the sword
  Of justice, Tallien emulates thy virtues;
  Tallien, like Brutus, lifts the avenging arm;
  Tallien shall save his country.

[Violent Applauses.]

BILLAUD VARENNES.
                                 I demand
  The arrest of all the traitors. Memorable
  Will be this day for France.

ROBESPIERRE.
                              Yes! Memorable
  This day will be for France--for villains triumph.

LEBAS.
  I will not share in this day's damning guilt.
  Condemn me too.

[Great cry
    --Down with the tyrants!
The two Robespierres, Couthon, St. Just, and Lebas are led off.]




ACT III.

SCENE continues.

COLLOT D'HERBOIS.
  Caesar is fallen! The baneful tree of Java,
  Whose death-distilling boughs dropt poisonous dew,
  Is rooted from its base. This worse than Cromwell,
  The austere, the self-denying Robespierre,
  Even in this hall, where once with terror mute
  We listen'd to the hypocrite's harangues,
  Has heard his doom.

BILLAUD VARENNES.
                      Yet must we not suppose
  The tyrant will fall tamely. His sworn hireling
  Henriot, the daring desperate Henriot
  Commands the force of Paris. I denounce him.

FRERON.
  I denounce Fleuriot too, the mayor of Paris.

[Enter DUBOIS CRANCE.]

DUBOIS CRANCE.
  Robespierre is rescued. Henriot, at the head
  Of the arm'd force, has rescued the fierce tyrant.

COLLOT D'HERBOIS.
  Ring the tocsin--call all the citizens
  To save their country--never yet has Paris
  Forsook the representatives of France.

TALLIEN.
  It is the hour of danger. I propose
  This sitting be made permanent.

[Loud Applauses.]

COLLOT D'HERBOIS.
  The national Convention shall remain
  Firm at its post.

[Enter a MESSENGER.]

MESSENGER.
  Robespierre has reach'd the Commune. They espouse
  The tyrant's cause. St. Just is up in arms!
  St. Just--the young, ambitious, bold St. Just
  Harangues the mob. The sanguinary Couthon
  Thirsts for your blood.

[Tocsin rings.]

TALLIEN.
  These tyrants are in arms against the law:
  Outlaw the rebels.

[Enter MERLIN OF DOUAY.]

MERLIN.
  Health to the representatives of France!
  I pass'd this moment through the armed force--
  They ask'd my name--and when they heard a delegate,
  Swore I was not the friend of France.

COLLOT D'HERBOIS.
  The tyrants threaten us as when they turn'd
  The cannon's mouth on Brissot.

[Enter another MESSENGER.]

SECOND MESSENGER.
  Vivier harangues the Jacobins--the club
  Espouse the cause of Robespierre.

[Enter another MESSENGER.]

THIRD MESSENGER.
  All's lost--the tyrant triumphs. Henriot leads
  The soldiers to his aid.--Already I hear
  The rattling cannon destin'd to surround
  This sacred hall.

TALLIEN.
  Why, we will die like men then.
  The representatives of France dare death,
  When duty steels their bosoms.

[Loud Applauses.]

TALLIEN [addressing the galleries.]
  Citizens! France is insulted in her delegates--
  The majesty of the Republic is insulted--
  Tyrants are up in arms. An armed force
  Threats the Convention. The Convention swears
  To die, or save the country!

[Violent Applauses from the galleries.]

CITIZEN [from above.]
                               We too swear
  To die, or save the country. Follow me.

[All the men quit the galleries.]

[Enter another MESSENGER.]

FOURTH MESSENGER.
  Henriot is taken!--

[Loud Applauses.]

  Henriot is taken. Three of your brave soldiers
  Swore they would seize the rebel slave of tyrants,
  Or perish in the attempt. As he patroll'd
  The streets of Paris, stirring up the mob,
  They seized him.

[Applauses.]

BILLAUD VARENNES.
  Let the names of these brave men
  Live to the future day.

[Enter BOURDON L'OISE, sword in hand.]

BOURDON L'OISE.
  I have clear'd the Commune.

[Applauses.]

  Through the throng I rush'd,
  Brandishing my good sword to drench its blade
  Deep in the tyrant's heart. The timid rebels
  Gave way. I met the soldiery--I spake
  Of the dictator's crimes--of patriots chain'd
  In dark deep dungeons by his lawless rage--
  Of knaves secure beneath his fostering power.
  I spake of Liberty. Their honest hearts
  Caught the warm flame. The general shout burst forth,
  "Live the Convention--Down with Robespierre!"

[Applauses. Shouts from without
    --Down with the tyrant!]

TALLIEN.
  I hear, I hear the soul-inspiring sounds,
  France shall be saved! her generous sons attach'd
  To principles, not persons, spurn the idol
  They worshipp'd once. Yes, Robespierre shall fall
  As Capet fell! Oh! never let us deem
  That France shall crouch beneath a tyrant's throne,
  That the almighty people who have broke
  On their oppressors' heads the oppressive chain,
  Will court again their fetters! easier were it
  To hurl the cloud-capt mountain from its base,
  Than force the bonds of slavery upon men
  Determined to be free!

[Applauses.]

[Enter LEGENDRE, a Pistol in one hand, Keys in the other.]

LEGENDRE, [flinging down the Keys.]
  So--let the mutinous Jacobins meet now In the open air.

[Loud Applauses.]

  A factious, turbulent party,
  Lording it o'er the state since Danton died,
  And with him the Cordeliers.--A hireling band
  Of loud-tongued orators controll'd the club,
  And bade them bow the knee to Robespierre.
  Vivier has 'scap'd me. Curse his coward heart--
  This fate-fraught tube of Justice in my hand,
  I rush'd into the hall. He mark'd mine eye,
  That beam'd its patriot anger, and flash'd full
  With death-denouncing meaning. 'Mid the throng
  He mingled. I pursued--but staid my hand,
  Lest haply I might shed the innocent blood.

[Applauses.]

FRERON.
  They took from me my ticket of admission--
  Expell'd me from their sittings.--Now, forsooth,
  Humbled and trembling re-insert my name.
  But Freron enters not the club again
  Till it be purged of guilt--till, purified
  Of tyrants and of traitors, honest men
  May breathe the air in safety.

[Shouts from without.]

BARRERE.
  What means this uproar! if the tyrant band
  Should gain the people once again to rise--
  We are as dead!

TALLIEN.
                  And wherefore fear we death?
  Did Brutus fear it? or the Grecian friends
  Who buried in Hipparchus' breast the sword,
  And died triumphant? Caesar should fear death,
  Brutus must scorn the bugbear.

[Shouts from without:
    Live the Convention--Down with the tyrants!]

TALLIEN.
                                  Hark! again
  The sounds of honest Freedom!

[Enter DEPUTIES from the SECTIONS.]

CITIZEN.
  Citizens! representatives of France!
  Hold on your steady course. The men of Paris
  Espouse your cause. The men of Paris swear
  They will defend the delegates of Freedom.

TALLIEN.
  Hear ye this, colleagues? hear ye this, my brethren?
  And does no thrill of joy pervade your breasts?
  My bosom bounds to rapture. I have seen
  The sons of France shake off the tyrant yoke;
  I have, as much as lies in mine own arm,
  Hurl'd down the usurper.--Come death when it will,
  I have lived long enough.

[Shouts without.]

BARRERE.
  Hark! how the noise increases! through the gloom
  Of the still evening--harbinger of death
  Rings the tocsin! the dreadful generale
  Thunders through Paris--

[Cry without
    --Down with the tyrant!]

[Enter LECOINTRE.]

LECOINTRE.
  So may eternal justice blast the foes
  Of France! so perish all the tyrant brood,
  As Robespierre has perish'd! Citizens,
  Caesar is taken.

[Loud and repeated Applauses.]

  I marvel not, that, with such fearless front,
  He braved our vengeance, and with angry eye
  Scowl'd round the hall defiance. He relied
  On Henriot's aid--the Commune's villain friendship,
  And Henriot's boughten succours. Ye have heard
  How Henriot rescued him--how with open arms
  The Commune welcomed in the rebel tyrant--
  How Fleuriot aided, and seditious Vivier
  Stirr'd up the Jacobins. All had been lost--
  The representatives of France had perish'd--
  Freedom had sunk beneath the tyrant arm
  Of this foul parricide, but that her spirit
  Inspired the men of Paris. Henriot call'd
  "To arms" in vain, whilst Bourdon's patriot voice
  Breathed eloquence, and o'er the Jacobins
  Legendre frown'd dismay. The tyrants fled--
  They reach'd the Hotel. We gather'd round--we call'd
  For vengeance! Long time, obstinate in despair,
  With knives they hack'd around them. Till foreboding
  The sentence of the law, the clamorous cry
  Of joyful thousands hailing their destruction,
  Each sought by suicide to escape the dread
  Of death. Lebas succeeded. From the window
  Leap'd the younger Robespierre; but his fractur'd limb
  Forbade to escape. The self-will'd dictator
  Plung'd often the keen knife in his dark breast,
  Yet impotent to die. He lives, all mangled
  By his own tremulous hand! All gash'd and gored,
  He lives to taste the bitterness of death.
  Even now they meet their doom. The bloody Couthon,
  The fierce St. Just, even now attend their tyrant
  To fall beneath the axe. I saw the torches
  Flash on their visages a dreadful light--
  I saw them whilst the black blood roll'd adown
  Each stern face, even then with dauntless eye
  Scowl round contemptuous, dying as they lived,
  Fearless of fate!

[Loud and repeated Applauses.]

BARRERE [mounts the Tribune.]
  For ever hallow'd be this glorious day,
  When Freedom, bursting her oppressive chain,
  Tramples on the oppressor. When the tyrant,
  Hurl'd from his blood-cemented throne by the arm
  Of the almighty people, meets the death
  He plann'd for thousands. Oh! my sickening heart
  Has sunk within me, when the various woes
  Of my brave country crowded o'er my brain
  In ghastly numbers--when assembled hordes,
  Dragg'd from their hovels by despotic power,
  Rush'd o'er her frontiers, plunder'd her fair hamlets,
  And sack'd her populous towns, and drench'd with blood
  The reeking fields of Flanders.--When within,
  Upon her vitals prey'd the rankling tooth
  Of treason; and oppression, giant form,
  Trampling on freedom, left the alternative
  Of slavery, or of death. Even from that day,
  When, on the guilty Capet, I pronounced
  The doom of injured France, has faction rear'd
  Her hated head amongst us. Roland preach'd
  Of mercy--the uxorious, dotard Roland,
  The woman-govern'd Roland durst aspire
  To govern France; and Petion talk'd of virtue,
  And Vergniaud's eloquence, like the honey'd tongue
  Of some soft Syren wooed us to destruction.
  We triumph'd over these. On the same scaffold
  Where the last Louis pour'd his guilty blood,
  Fell Brissot's head, the womb of darksome treasons,
  And Orleans, villain kinsman of the Capet,
  And Hebert's atheist crew, whose maddening hand
  Hurl'd down the altars of the living God,
  With all the infidel's intolerance.
  The last worst traitor triumph'd--triumph'd long,
  Secured by matchless villany. By turns
  Defending and deserting each accomplice
  As interest prompted. In the goodly soil
  Of Freedom, the foul tree of treason struck
  Its deep-fix'd roots, and dropt the dews of death
  On all who slumber'd in its specious shade.
  He wove the web of treachery. He caught
  The listening crowd by his wild eloquence,
  His cool ferocity that persuaded murder,
  Even whilst it spake of mercy!--never, never
  Shall this regenerated country wear
  The despot yoke. Though myriads round assail,
  And with worse fury urge this new crusade
  Than savages have known; though the leagued despots
  Depopulate all Europe, so to pour
  The accumulated mass upon our coasts,
  Sublime amid the storm shall France arise,
  And like the rock amid surrounding waves
  Repel the rushing ocean.--She shall wield
  The thunder-bolt of vengeance--she shall blast
  The despot's pride, and liberate the world!