KUBLA KHAN

  In Xanadu did Kubla Khan
  A stately pleasure-dome decree:
  Where Alph, the sacred river, ran
  Through caverns measureless to man
    Down to a sunless sea.                                             5
  So twice five miles of fertile ground
  With walls and towers were girdled round:
  And here were gardens bright with sinuous rills,
  Where blossomed many an incense-bearing tree;
  And here were forests ancient as the hills,                         10
  Enfolding sunny spots of greenery.

  But oh! that deep romantic chasm which slanted
  Down the green hill athwart a cedarn cover!
  A savage place! as holy and enchanted
  As e'er beneath a waning moon was haunted                           15
  By woman wailing for her demon-lover!
  And from this chasm, with ceaseless turmoil seething,
  As if this earth in fast thick pants were breathing,
  A mighty fountain momently was forced:
  Amid whose swift half-intermitted burst                             20
  Huge fragments vaulted like rebounding hail,
  Or chaffy grain beneath the thresher's flail:
  And 'mid these dancing rocks at once and ever
  It flung up momently the sacred river.
  Five miles meandering with a mazy motion                            25
  Through wood and dale the sacred river ran,
  Then reached the caverns measureless to man,
  And sank in tumult to a lifeless ocean:
  And 'mid this tumult Kubla heard from far
  Ancestral voices prophesying war!                                   30

      The shadow of the dome of pleasure
      Floated midway on the waves;
    Where was heard the mingled measure
      From the fountain and the caves.
  It was a miracle of rare device,                                    35
  A sunny pleasure-dome with caves of ice!

      A damsel with a dulcimer
      In a vision once I saw:
      It was an Abyssinian maid,
      And on her dulcimer she played,                                 40
      Singing of Mount Abora.
      Could I revive within me.
      Her symphony and song,
      To such a deep delight 'twould win me,
  That with music loud and long,                                      45
  I would build that dome in air,
  That sunny dome! those caves of ice!
  And all who heard should see them there,
  And all should cry, Beware! Beware!
  His flashing eyes, his floating hair!                               50
  Weave a circle round him thrice,
  And close your eyes with holy dread,
  For he on honey-dew hath fed,
  And drunk the milk of Paradise.


FRANCE: AN ODE



I

  Ye Clouds! that far above me float and pause,
    Whose pathless march no mortal may control!
    Ye Ocean-Waves! that, wheresoe'er ye roll,
  Yield homage only to eternal laws!
  Ye Woods! that listen to the night-birds' singing,                   5
    Midway the smooth and perilous slope reclined,
  Save when your own imperious branches swinging,
    Have made a solemn music of the wind!
  Where, like a man beloved of God,
  Through glooms, which never woodman trod,                           10
      How oft, pursuing fancies holy,
  My moonlight way o'er flowering weeds I wound,
      Inspired, beyond the guess of folly,
  By each rude shape and wild unconquerable sound!
  O ye loud Waves! and O ye Forests high!                             15
    And O ye Clouds that far above me soared!
  Thou rising Sun! thou blue rejoicing Sky!
    Yea, every thing that is and will be free!
    Bear witness for me, wheresoe'er ye be,
    With what deep worship I have still adored                        20
    The spirit of divinest Liberty.



II

  When France in wrath her giant-limbs upreared,
    And with that oath, which smote air, earth, and sea,
    Stamped her strong foot and said she would be free,
  Bear witness for me, how I hoped and feared!                        25

  With what a joy my lofty gratulation
    Unawed I sang, amid a slavish band:
  And when to whelm the disenchanted nation,
    Like fiends embattled by a wizard's wand,
  The Monarchs marched in evil day,                                   30
  And Britain joined the dire array;
    Though dear her shores and circling ocean,
  Though many friendships, many youthful loves
    Had swoln the patriot emotion
  And flung a magic light o'er all her hills and groves;              35
  Yet still my voice, unaltered, sang defeat
    To all that braved the tyrant-quelling lance,
  And shame too long delayed and vain retreat!
  For ne'er, O Liberty! with partial aim
  I dimmed thy light or damped thy holy flame;                        40
    But blessed the paeans of delivered France,
  And hung my head and wept at Britain's name.



III

  "And what," I said, "though Blasphemy's loud scream
    With that sweet music of deliverance strove!
    Though all the fierce and drunken passions wove                   45
  A dance more wild than e'er was maniac's dream!
    Ye storms, that round the dawning east assembled,
  The Sun was rising, though ye hid his light!"
    And when, to soothe my soul, that hoped and trembled,
  The dissonance ceased, and all seemed calm and bright;              50
    When France her front deep-scarred and gory
    Concealed with clustering wreaths of glory;
      When, insupportably advancing,
    Her arm made mockery of the warrior's ramp;
      While timid looks of fury glancing,                             55
    Domestic treason, crushed beneath her fatal stamp,
  Writhed like a wounded dragon in his gore;
    Then I reproached my fears that would not flee;
  "And soon," I said, "shall Wisdom teach her lore
  In the low huts of them that toil and groan!                        60
  And, conquering by her happiness alone,
    Shall France compel the nations to be free,
  Till Love and Joy look round, and call the Earth their own."



IV

  Forgive me, Freedom! O forgive those dreams!
    I hear thy voice, I hear thy loud lament,                         65
    From bleak Helvetia's icy caverns sent--
  I hear thy groans upon her blood-stained streams!
    Heroes, that for your peaceful country perished,
  And ye that, fleeing, spot your mountain-snows
    With bleeding wounds; forgive me, that I cherished                70
  One thought that ever blessed your cruel foes!
    To scatter rage and traitorous guilt
    Where Peace her jealous home had built;
      A patriot-race to disinherit
  Of all that made their stormy wilds so dear;                        75
      And with inexpiable spirit
  To taint the bloodless freedom of the mountaineer--
  O France, that mockest Heaven, adulterous, blind,
    And patriot only in pernicious toils!
  Are these thy boasts, Champion of human kind?                       80
    To mix with Kings in the low lust of sway,
  Tell in the hunt, and share the murderous prey;
  To insult the shrine of Liberty with spoils
  From freemen torn; to tempt and to betray?



V

      The Sensual and the Dark rebel in vain,                         85
    Slaves by their own compulsion! In mad game
    They burst their manacles and wear the name
      Of Freedom, graven on a heavier chain!
    O Liberty! with profitless endeavour
  Have I pursued thee, many a weary hour;                             90
    But thou nor swell'st the victor's strain, nor ever
  Didst breathe thy soul in forms of human power.

    Alike from all, howe'er they praise thee,
    (Nor prayer, nor boastful name delays thee)
      Alike from Priestcraft's harpy minions,                         95
    And factious Blasphemy's obscener slaves,
      Thou speedest on thy subtle pinions,
  The guide of homeless winds, and playmate of the waves!
  And there I felt thee!--on that sea-cliff's verge,
    Whose pines, scarce travelled by the breeze above,               100
  Had made one murmur with the distant surge!
  Yes, while I stood and gazed, my temples bare,
  And shot my being through earth, sea and air,
    Possessing all things with intensest love,
      O Liberty! my spirit felt thee there.                          105




DEJECTION: AN ODE

  Late, late yestreen I saw the new Moon,
  With the old Moon in her arms;
  And I fear, I fear, my Master dear!
  We shall have a deadly storm.

_Ballad of Sir Patrick Spence._



I

  Well! If the Bard was weather-wise, who made
    The grand old ballad of Sir Patrick Spence,
    This night, so tranquil now, will not go hence
  Unroused by winds, that ply a busier trade
  Than those which mould yon cloud in lazy flakes,                     5
  Or the dull sobbing draft, that moans and rakes
      Upon the strings of this Aeolian lute,
      Which better far were mute.
    For lo! the New-moon winter-bright!
    And overspread with phantom light,                                10
    (With swimming phantom light o'erspread
    But rimmed and circled by a silver thread)
  I see the old Moon in her lap, foretelling
    The coming-on of rain and squally blast.
  And oh! that even now the gust were swelling,                       15
    And the slant night-shower driving loud and fast!
  Those sounds which oft have raised me, whilst they awed,
      And sent my soul abroad,
  Might now perhaps their wonted impulse give,
  Might startle this dull pain, and make it move so and live!         20



II

  A grief without a pang, void, dark, and drear,
    A stifled, drowsy, unimpassioned grief,
    Which finds no natural outlet, no relief,
        In word, or sigh, or tear--
  O Lady! in this wan and heartless mood,                             25
  To other thoughts by yonder throstle wooed,
    All this long eve, so balmy and serene,
  Have I been gazing on the western sky,
    And its peculiar tint of yellow green:
  And still I gaze--and with how blank an eye!                        30
  And those thin clouds above, in flakes and bars,
  That give away their motion to the stars;
  Those stars, that glide behind them or between,
  Now sparkling, now bedimmed, but always seen:
  Yon crescent Moon, as fixed as if it grew                           35
  In its own cloudless, starless lake of blue;
  I see them all so excellently fair,
  I see, not feel, how beautiful they are!



III

      My genial spirits fail;
      And what can these avail                                        40
  To lift the smothering weight from off my breast?
      It were a vain endeavour,
      Though I should gaze for ever
  On that green light that lingers in the west:
  I may not hope from outward forms to win                            45
  The passion and the life, whose fountains are within.



IV

  O Lady! we receive but what we give,
  And in our life alone does Nature live:
  Ours is her wedding garment, ours her shroud!
    And would we aught behold, of higher worth.                       50

  Than that inanimate cold world allowed
  To the poor loveless ever-anxious crowd,
    Ah, from the soul itself must issue forth
  A light, a glory, a fair luminous cloud
      Enveloping the Earth--                                          55
  And from the soul itself must there be sent
    A sweet and potent voice, of its own birth,
  Of all sweet sounds the life and element!



V

  O pure of heart! thou need'st not ask of me
  What this strong music in the soul may be!                          60
  What, and wherein it doth exist,
  This light, this glory, this fair luminous mist,
  This beautiful and beauty-making power.
    Joy, virtuous Lady! Joy that ne'er was given,
  Save to the pure, and in their purest hour,                         65
  Life, and Life's effluence, cloud at once and shower,
  Joy, Lady! is the spirit and the power,
  Which wedding Nature to us gives in dower,
    A new Earth and new Heaven,
  Undreamt of by the sensual and the proud--                          70
  Joy is the sweet voice, Joy the luminous cloud--
      We in ourselves rejoice!
  And thence flows all that charms or ear or sight,
    All melodies the echoes of that voice,
  All colours a suffusion from that light.                            75



VI

  There was a time when, though my path was rough,
    This joy within me dallied with distress,
  And all misfortunes were but as the stuff
    Whence Fancy made me dreams of happiness:
  For hope grew round me, like the twining vine,                      80
  And fruits, and foliage, not my own, seemed mine.

  But now afflictions bow me down to earth:
  Nor care I that they rob me of my mirth;
      But oh! each visitation
  Suspends what nature gave me at my birth,                           85
    My shaping spirit of Imagination.
  For not to think of what I needs must feel,
    But to be still and patient, all I can;
  And haply by abstruse research to steal
    From my own nature all the natural man--                          90
    This was my sole resource, my only plan:
  Till that which suits a part infects the whole,
  And now is almost grown the habit of my soul.



VII

  Hence, viper thoughts, that coil around my mind,
      Reality's dark dream!                                           95
  I turn from you, and listen to the wind,
    Which long has raved unnoticed. What a scream
  Of agony by torture lengthened out
  That lute sent forth! Thou Wind, that rav'st without,
    Bare crag, or mountain-tairn, or blasted tree,                   100
  Or pine-grove whither woodman never clomb,
  Or lonely house, long held the witches' home,
    Methinks were fitter instruments for thee,
  Mad Lutanist! who in this month of showers,
  Of dark-brown gardens, and of peeping flowers,                     105
  Mak'st Devils' yule, with worse than wintry song,
  The blossoms, buds, and timorous leaves among.
    Thou Actor, perfect in all tragic sounds!
  Thou mighty Poet, even to frenzy bold!
      What tell'st thou now about?                                   110
      'Tis of the rushing of an host in rout,
    With groans of trampled men, with smarting wounds--
  At once they groan with pain, and shudder with the cold!

  But hush! there is a pause of deepest silence!
    And all that noise, as of a rushing crowd,                       115
  With groans, and tremulous shudderings--all is over--
    It tells another tale, with sounds less deep and loud!
      A tale of less affright,
      And tempered with delight,
  As Otway's self had framed the tender lay,                         120
      'Tis of a little child
      Upon a lonesome wild,
  Not far from home, but she hath lost her way:
  And now moans low in bitter grief and fear,
  And now screams loud, and hopes to make her mother hear.           125



VIII

  'Tis midnight, but small thoughts have I of sleep:
  Full seldom may my friend such vigils keep!
  Visit her, gentle Sleep! with wings of healing,
    And may this storm be but a mountain-birth,
  May all the stars hang bright above her dwelling,                  130
    Silent as though they watched the sleeping Earth!
      With light heart may she rise,
      Gay fancy, cheerful eyes,
    Joy lift her spirit, joy attune her voice;
  To her may all things live, from pole to pole,                     135
  Their life the eddying of her living soul!
    O simple spirit, guided from above,
  Dear Lady! friend devoutest of my choice,
  Thus mayest thou ever, evermore rejoice.




YOUTH AND AGE

  Verse, a breeze mid blossoms straying,
  Where Hope clung feeding, like a bee--
  Both were mine! Life went a-maying
    With Nature, Hope, and Poesy,
      When I was young!                                                5

  _When_ I was young?--Ah, woful When!
  Ah! for the change 'twixt Now and Then!
  This breathing house not built with hands,
  This body that does me grievous wrong,
  O'er aery cliffs and glittering sands,                              10
  How lightly _then_ it flashed along:--
  Like those trim skiffs, unknown of yore,
  On winding lakes and rivers wide,
  That ask no aid of sail or oar,
  That fear no spite of wind or tide!                                 15
  Nought cared this body for wind or weather
  When Youth and I lived in 't together.

  Flowers are lovely; Love is flower-like;
  Friendship is a sheltering tree;
  O! the joys, that came down shower-like,                            20
  Of Friendship, Love, and Liberty,
    Ere I was old!

  _Ere_ I was old? Ah woful Ere,
  Which tells me Youth 's no longer here!
  O Youth! for years so many and sweet,                               25
  'Tis known, that thou and I were one,
  I'll think it but a fond conceit--
  It cannot be that thou art gone!
  Thy vesper-bell hath not yet tolled:--
  And thou wert aye a masker bold!                                    30
  What strange disguise hast now put on,
  To _make believe_, that thou art gone?
  I see these locks in silvery slips,
  This drooping gait, this altered size:
  But Spring-tide blossoms on thy lips,                               35
  And tears take sunshine from thine eyes!
  Life is but thought: so think I will
  That Youth and I are house-mates still.

  Dew-drops are the gems of morning,
  But the tears of mournful eve!                                      40
  Where no hope is, life 's a warning
  That only serves to make us grieve,
    When we are old:
  That only serves to make us grieve
  With oft and tedious taking-leave,                                  45
  Like some poor nigh-related guest,
  That may not rudely be dismist;
  Yet hath outstayed his welcome while,
  And tells the jest without the smile.




WORK WITHOUT HOPE

LINES COMPOSED 21ST FEBRUARY 1827


  All Nature seems at work. Slugs leave their lair--
  The bees are stirring--birds are on the wing--
  And Winter slumbering in the open air,
  Wears on his smiling face a dream of Spring!
  And I the while, the sole unbusy thing,                              5
  Nor honey make, nor pair, nor build, nor sing.

  Yet well I ken the banks where amaranths blow,
  Have traced the fount whence streams of nectar flow.
  Bloom, O ye amaranths! bloom for whom ye may,
  For me ye bloom not! Glide, rich streams, away!                     10
  With lips unbrightened, wreathless brow, I stroll:
  And would you learn the spells that drowse my soul?
  Work without Hope draws nectar in a sieve,
  And Hope without an object cannot live.




EPITAPH

  Stop, Christian passer-by!--Stop, child of God,
  And read with gentle breast. Beneath this sod
  A poet lies, or that which once seemed he.--
  O, lift one thought in prayer for S.T.C.;
  That he who many a year with toil of breath                          5
  Found death in life, may here find life in death!
  Mercy for praise--to be forgiven for fame
  He ask'd, and hoped, through Christ.
    Do thou the same!